After all the discussions of
first class functions and
all these other features in JavaScript,
we're ready to discuss one of my
favorite topics when it comes to
the JavaScript programming language.
It's called Functional Programming.
Although JavaScript sounds like it's
related to the Java programming
language and looks like
the C++ C# Java languages a bit.
It really has more in
common in many ways with
other languages called functional
programming languages.
Languages like Lisp or Scheme or ML.
These are languages that have first
class functions like we've talked about.
Functions that behave as objects.
You can pass them as parameters.
You can return them from functions.
And so, having first class functions
in a JavaScript programming language
means that we can implement what's
called functional programming.
Where we think and
code in terms of functions.
This is one of my favorite topics because
it introduces an entirely different way of
thinking and
implementing when programming.
And introduces an approach
that you simply can't
do in other programming languages that
don't have first class functions.
So let's take a look at some examples of
the beauty of functional programming.
We'll start with a simple array.
I'll put a few numeric values in
an array and I'll just log is so
that we can keep track
of what we're doing, and
let's suppose my task here is to create
a new array out of this first array.
So I need to loop over all
of the items in the array.
Let's say array 1.length,
there's a length property,
how big big it is, how long it is, and
I'm going to use the push
property of the method
to let's say double each
value in this first array.
I'm creating a second array that has each
item double the value of its
equivalent item in the first one.
So I loop over each item, and
I push a value that's times 2 of that.
I get 1, 2, 3, and
then my new array is 2, 4, 6.
I had to write of code to do that.
And we know that as programmers, we want
to always minimize how much work we're
doing, how much typing we're doing and
how often we're repeating ourselves.
We tend to put things into
functions in order to do that,
to limit repetition,
we put work into functions.
In programming languages where
functions aren't first class,
there is limitations to how much
you can put into a function,
to how granularly you
can segment your code.
However, with first class functions we
an do something entirely different.
We can head toward functional programming.
So let's say, for example,
I create a new function.
I'm gonna call it mapForEach.
It takes an array and it takes a function.
Remember I'm using first class functions
so I can pass a function object.
Map simply means what we just did here.
I'm going to take one array, do something
to it and get a new array out of it.
I create a very simple mapping function.
I'll do very similarly
to what I did below.
I'll even borrow this for loop here.
I'll just change this to array, so
I'm looping over whatever array is passed.
I'm going to push to the new array, but
here is where my functional
programming comes in.
I'm going to call a function and
pass in that array item.
And then,
this is going to return the new array.
So do you see what I'm doing?
I'm saying,
I'm going to create a new array.
Loop over the array you've given me.
And add to that new array for
every item in the one that you gave me.
Your array item, which is processed by
some function that you also give me.
I've just abstracted
the concept of iterating or
looping over an array,
creating a new array out of it, and
writing some function, whatever function
you want to, against each item.
Take some action against each item,
pass this array item to the function.
And this function should then
return something that it does with
that array item.
And I'll add that to my new array.
If I do that,
then I can take all of this code here
and instead, I can simply call mapForEach.
I'll pass that first array to it and
then I'll create a function
using a function expression.
It needs to accept an item, because that's
what's going to be passed to it, so
I'll just call it item.
And then it needs to return and
then do something to that item.
Do you see what's happening here?
Let's output this, let's go ahead and
run this, and I get the same results.
A doubled array.
But what I did was I
took all of that code,
all of that noise, of the four loop and
creating the new array, and I segmented
that off into its own function.
And then I gave it the work to do
against each item in the array.
This is very powerful.
Think about his for a bit, look at it.
I called a function.
Gave it an array and told it what
to do in each item in the array.
Then this function here
is what's passed in.
And that is what's called,
what's invoked, as the function
is looping across the array.
That means that I could do
something entirely different.
Let's say I have a third
array that I'm gonna fill up.
And I'll give it this initial 1,
2, 3 array.
But, I don't even have to do
mathematical things with this.
I could simply say, tell me, give me
an array that matches up to this original,
but instead tells me if
an item is greater than two.
See that?
I'm using the exact same map for
each call.
And I'm giving a different bit of work and
then returning a Boolean in this case,
true or false.
So, when I output this,
we get false, false, true.
1 is not greater than 2.
2 is not greater than 2.
3 is greater than 2.
So, I get false, false, true.
See that?
I was able then to reuse this map for
each to do entirely different work against
the array simply by passing the function,
passing the work that I wanted
to get done against it.
This is a classic example
of functional programming.
Where I'm using first class
functions to my advantage
to segment my code in even cleaner and
tighter ways.
And this lets me build really clean and
in some ways beautiful looking code.
That's very straightforward to understand.
So mess around with this.
Try creating your own functions
that you pass to the mapForEach.
Or create some other function that
accepts a function that does work.
Let's look at another example.
Let's say,
let me spread this out just a little bit.
Let's say that I'm gonna
use my mapForEach to check
if something is past a limit,
just like here.
But what if I want to make this
two a variable that I pass in,
so that I can make this reusable?
Well, I can do the creation
of a new function.
And maybe I'll pass my limiter,
what it is that I wanna say
that it must be greater than.
Or less than and
it will accept the item as
well because it's gonna do work
against each item in the array.
And I'll return item > limiter.
See that?
So it's past whatever limit,
I passed to it.
I'm just using a variable instead of
directly hard coding a number right there.
I'm saying check and
see if this item is past a certain limit.
All right, so how can I use this?
I have a bit of a problem.
This function accepts two parameters,
and the map for
each wants a function
that accepts just one.
So how can I take a function and
call it, or
use it in a way that I've
preset this parameter.
So that this function call up here
where it passes the item in my
past in array to the function.
So that that get's passed to item and
I would preset this.
Do you remember?
So, I can use bind.
I could say, I'll create another array,
mapForEach, pass on that initial array.
checkPastLimit, but I'll bind.
The this keyword I don't
need to worry about.
So I'll just pass the whatever this
keyword is here, and I'll set 1.
Remember that if I put
parameters on the bind,
it will default that parameter or
preset that parameter to that value.
For every subsequent function call.
So I've just created a copy
of this function on the fly,
with 1 as the limiter.
So now I can just console.log
the resulting array.
So this should return false or
true depending on if each item
in the array is greater than 1.
There it is, 1 is not greater than 1,
2 is greater than 1, 3 is greater than 1.
Do you see that?
That's my resulting array.
Let's track what happened again.
I created a function using a function
expression that accepted some limiter
that I'm checking against to see if my
individual array items are higher than it.
Accepts an item because we need to
do work on each individual item.
And it gives me back a Boolean.
I then call mapForEach,
and I pass the array.
That's the array that it loops over.
And I pass a function.
But I make a copy of it using bind.
I just put this in there because
it doesn't really matter.
I'm not using a this keyword
inside the function, and
then I set this first parameter to a 1.
So that when this mapForEach
calls function and
passes that array item,
that array item will get passed into here.
Cuz this is already a 1,
the limiter is already a 1.
So it will say, all right,
is this array item greater than one?
It give me back true or false.
It mapped one, two, three.
To false, true, true.
I could change this to a two.
It becomes false, false, true.
2 is not greater than 2,
so that becomes false.
Make sense?
And that's all in one line of code.
But you might say well, it's kind of
annoying to call bind all the time.
It would be nice just to pass in
my limiter as the only parameter.
Can you think of a way to do that?
Can we create a function where
I only pass in the limiter
and it gives me back a function like this?
Give that a try, pause the video.
Try to figure out a way to wrap up this
into a function that
just takes the limiter.
So that all I have to do is just call it
and pass whatever my limiting value is,
my top value,
my value that I want to be right there.
Pause the video and try that for yourself.
See if you can come up with a function
that will be even easier to use so
that I don't have to call
.bind manually all the time.
All right, ready?
I'm gonna create,
I'll call it checkPastLimitSimplified.
And it's gonna just take the limiter.
And since it's going to
just take the limiter,
I need to create a function
that I created up here.
So it's going to return a function object.
So I have a function that
returns a function, but
I need it to have its Initial value.
It's first parameter preset.
All right.
Let's take a look at this again.
I have a function that takes the limiter.
It itself returns the function that
I'll actually use, limiter, item.
I use .bind to preset the limiter
from what I was passed here.
So when I run checkPastLimitSimplified,
it will execute,
and it will just give me back a function
that had the bind called on it.
Just like this here, essentially.
Now, don't get confused by this
limiter and this limiter here.
This isn't getting passed to this.
This function isn't being executed.
It's simply creating the function object.
I create it with a function expression.
Then copy that object that was
created with bind with this limiter
perimeter preset to whatever the value
is I passed into that outer function.
So I'm creating an object.
That's all I'm doing,
I'm creating an object.
I'm using .bind to create an object
that has its first parameter preset.
So let's use this,
I'll create yet another array.
MapForEach, pass that first
array that has one, two, three,
and I'll use checkPastLimitSimplified and
I'll simply set my limiter.
Let's log this.
False, false, true.
One is not greater than two.
Two is not greater than two.
Three is greater than two.
Let's change it, I'll just set a one.
One is not greater than one,
two is greater than one,
three is greater than one.
Do you see that?
Do you see what's happening?
I called this function, which returned
a function object with its first
parameter preset to this number,
and that returned
function object is what gets
passed to the map for each.
And then it gets called, and
I get my new array back in one very clean,
very simple line of code that I can reuse.
I hope at this point,
you're taking a good look at this code and
trying this for yourself, that you come
to begin to appreciate the power and
expressiveness of functional programming.
Instead of thinking purely in just
separating your code into functions,
you can start to think about how can
I give my functions, functions, or
return functions from my functions,
in order to even
greater simplify the code that
I'm writing over and over again.
At first, it may feel like it's
stretching your brain a little bit,
to have all these functions flying around.
But once you get used to it,
it's very natural feeling to split
things into functions,
to pass them around to each other,
because you're just splitting
up the work in even finer
more minute granular details than you
might in other programming languages.
And this gives you
an opportunity to really do
some extraordinarily clean things.
One other note about functional
programming, your functions,
especially the tiny ones, as you're moving
and passing little functions around
that do work,
should do their best not mutate data.
Mutate remember, means change.
You can really find yourself in
odd circumstances when you're
actually changing data in these little
tiny functions that you start to pass
around as you're breaking things
down in functional programming.
So it's always better to mutate data,
that is, change it
as high up in that chain as possible of
functions, or to not change it at all.
Instead, return something new,
like we're doing here with
new arrays as opposed to changing
that core array that I passed in.
That's just a side note about
functional programming.
Functional programming in itself
could be an entire course.
But I wanted to introduce you
to this idea in JavaScript
because I think this
first class functions and
functional programming in JavaScript Is
really what takes JavaScript to the next
level, and will take you as a JavaScript
programmer to the next level.
Instead of simply using JavaScript the way
that you use maybe other programming
languages, like PHP or Java or C# or
whatever, you can use the full power of
the language that's available to you.
It's not available in
those other languages.
All right, let's take a moment to talk
about one of the most well used and
well known examples of functional
programming in JavaScript.